---
layout: post
title: 'Locations of our Ancestors'
date: 2017-11-25
author: 1947-marcel-g-hogue
---

So that you may get a sense, geographically speaking, of where the Hogue’s come from, allow me to briefly describe some of the locations of the towns and villages identified in this body of research, as well as the life and times the Hogue’s lived in.

First you should know that the name “Hogue” is a derivative of the Old Norse (Scandinavian) word “Haugr”, which means “little hill”, “knoll” or “mound”.

## Jean Hogue and son Pierre

Our story begins when [Jean Hogue]({% link _people/1625-jean-hogue.md %}) (his parents and any previous Hogue’s are unknown) is born about 1625 in <span lang="fr">Amiens</span>, located in the <span lang="fr">Somme</span> River Valley, the historical capital of the <span lang="fr">Picardie</span> region of northern France, some 80 miles north of Paris, of which a portion borders the English Channel and Belgium. He marries Nicole Dubus (her parents are also unknown) in 1646, and a son is born to them in 1648 named [Pierre]({% link _people/1648-pierre-hogue.md %}) (it is unknown if there are other children born of this marriage). At 23 or 24 years of age, Pierre sails to “New France” (now Canada) and arrives in the summer of 1672 (possibly as a member of a military company). He eventually settles in the village of “<span lang="fr">Rivieres-des-Prairies</span>.”

<span lang="fr">Riviere-des-Prairies</span> (the village) is frequently referred to as a birthplace or residence, especially in the early years, from the late 1600s and into the 19th century. It is the area in Canada our roots begin. It is located approximately 8 miles (as the crow flies) north of Montreal center on the most north-easterly end of the island; keep in mind that Montreal is an island surrounded by the St Lawrence Seaway (the island of Montreal was originally called <span lang="fr">Hochelaga</span> (river) <span lang="fr">Riviere-des-Praries</span> flows on the north side dividing the island of Montreal from <span lang="fr">Isle Jesus</span> (present day Laval). The assumption is that we settled in this area because land was available and well suitable for farming. It was also the area most familiar to Pierre, due to his (possible) military service and location of assignment. Generally speaking, people tended to stay where the area was familiar, and back then, where the native population was not hostile or numerous, or at the very least, where they were under constant watch by a military presence. Pierre and his offspring generally stay within this area from roughly 1680 to 1780.

Other areas that are mentioned, such as <span lang="fr">Pointe-aux-Trembles</span> and the island of <span lang="fr">Isle Jesus</span>, are relatively near to <span lang="fr">Riviere-des-Prairies</span> (the village), both within a 3 mile radius. By the fourth generation, some of the Hogue’s begin moving away from The Homestead and go to places like <span lang="fr">Vercheres</span> and beyond, but still stay within a 20 mile radius of Montreal. The <span lang="fr">Richelieu</span> River, which runs from the St. Laurence River to Lake Champlain in New York State, had several villages established along its banks, some of which are also mentioned in these early years. Historically speaking, the area closest to a source of water were usually the first places people would settle. Also, people did not usually venture far from home back then, taking into consideration that if you wanted to go anywhere, it was either on foot or by horse and carriage.

<span lang="fr">Riviere-des-Prairies</span> / <span lang="fr">Pointe-aux-Trembles</span> areas are the farthest north-easterly villages of the island, and are within a 4 mile radius from each other. As stated earlier, they are part of the St. Lawrence basin and the gray-brown soil was good farmland. The Saint Lawrence River eventually continues into the Gulf of St. Lawrence and is the chief outlet of the Great Lakes to the Atlantic Ocean, a natural “highway” for the early settlers as it is today.
  
## A short history of Canada

In 1534, the French explorer <span lang="fr">Jacques Cartier</span> claims the land along the river which he “has just discovered” and names it St. Lawrence for France. Further exploration was halted by the harsh winters, primitive living conditions, and the constant threat of attack by indigenous people. Exploration did not begin again on a large scale until the late 16th century, spurred on by the abundance of wildlife and their furs. In the 17th century, to encourage a continued presence in “New France” and counteract any possible threat from the new British America, the King of France established fiefs of land granted to <span lang="fr">“seigneurs”</span> who would oversee the work of tenant farmers. Eventually, the settlements of Quebec City, <span lang="fr">Trois Rivieres</span>, and Montreal would be established. 

### “The King Daughters”

To increase the population, the King sent women of marriageable age to New France and provided them with transportation and a dowry. This program was called “<span lang="fr">Les Filles du Roi</span>” (The Kings daughters) and was in effect for 10 years from 1663 to 1673. Some 800 to 900 women were sent during this time period. Due to hostilities with indigenous peoples, defense was improved by the arrival in 1665 of the French <span lang="fr">Carignan-Salieres</span> regiment, and by 1712 had gained control of the area against Indian raids and hostilities with the construction of forts and defenses. However, unrest persisted for the next 50 years or so, and included conflicts with British troops, the French and Indian war, the Canadian involvement in the American war for independence, the deportation of Arcadians, and war between England and France, which culminated with the treaty of Paris in 1763, in which France relinquishes control of her North American possessions. “New France” becomes “Upper Canada” (English speaking) and “Lower Canada” (French speaking) and comes under British rule. Canadians remain British subjects until 1946, after which, Canada is configured into the 9 Provinces we currently know.

## Work and Trades

I would venture to say that most of our early ancestors were farmers, with possibly some carpenters in the mix as well. After all, people tended to be Jacks of all trades back then (no Home Depot to go to). Life, I’m sure, was difficult. Homes lacked basic conveniences (things we take for granted until there’s a power outage) and winters were harsh. Work began at sun-up, and didn’t end until sundown. There were no lights, except for candles and fire, and no in-door plumbing. You had to hunt and “process” your own food. There were no paved roads. Major transportation was by river boat when the water was flowing, and on sleds when the water was frozen. There where no machines to do some of the work or household chores, and, as if the women weren’t busy enough, they usually had several children to clothe and feed (“vacations” did not exist). Life expectancy was not what it is today, and many children died before reaching maturity due to disease and lack of available medical care.

Villages and towns were close-knit communities, and marriages with your neighbors within that community were common. You attended their marriages and they attended yours. The places our ancestors were born, were also where they lived, married, and died, as was the case with most people of the time. That is, until the great migration to America in the 19th and 20th centuries. Due to several factors and economic conditions, in excess of 1 million people (from a population of 6.5 million) left the farms of Quebec to come and work in the textile mills of New England, in the hopes of a better life for themselves and their children.

Francois (Gen. #8.1) seems to be the first “Hogue” to come to “<span lang="fr">les Etats-Unis</span>” (United States). He is born in Sorel in the year of 1846 (this year is uncertain), but is married in Woonsocket, Rhode Island in 1863. He dies in Woonsocket in 1904. Some of his children are born in the United States; others are born in Canada (I guess it was easy to move back and forth in those days). Oral history has his profession as stonemason, hence the various locations for the birth of his children (he went where there was work, where mills and homes were being built). Subsequent generations of Francois fan out throughout New England, with some eventually as faraway as Florida, Wyoming, and California.
